When we talk about motivation of human work in an organization,
a very important value, among all the above points,
is the problem of building leadership in a company,
the problem of management functions,
what kind of relationship system exists,
what kind of delegated authority system exists,
what kind of management style exists,
is it authoritarian,
you will do what you were told,
and everything else is out of work,
is it democratic,
these are the tasks that need to be solved,
these are the deadlines that need to be solved.
And then there is no strict control
how you will do, what you will do.
Please, show initiative,
use your authority, use your opportunities,
make a proposal,
but you must fulfill the task.
How will you implement it?
These are your questions.
I am sure in the professionalism and competence of my employees,
I am sure that they will be able to cope with their task.
And in this regard, I will not waste time
to control every step of theirs.
There are three main approaches to management of an organization
closely related to the construction of a motivation system.
You have already considered different approaches to management of an organization.
Let's now consider these approaches from a motivational point of view.
Because as far as the management system is concerned,
the management system,
the system of distribution of powers,
the system of delegating powers,
it largely determines those motivational methods,
those motivational factors,
those motivational approaches that are implemented in the company.
The first, the most famous type of management
is the so-called direct administration.
It is known in literature,
it is known in business practice as the X-theory.
Direct administration implies the presence of orders,
orders, rules, instructions,
positions that determine all methods of your behavior.
This is a strict administration.
There are different types of regulations.
There is labor discipline.
There is a reward for non-interference in compliance with the rules,
and fines and sanctions for their violation.
Everything is clearly written.
What is allowed, what is not allowed.
Where, what can be done and.
In this case,
the employee's own motivation is practically absent.
The employee works only based on material stimulation.
Here is your workload.
Here is your positional instruction.
Here is the department's regulations.
Here is the procedure of passing the documents that are there.
And here are the tasks that you have to solve.
It is precisely these methods that any initiative is punishable.
In this regard, you want to get a salary,
do what is necessary and do not come up with anything new.
The X-theory, which, in fact,
is rooted in some kind of motivation.
It seems that it is not worth saying that such an approach
with strict administration often limits,
not only limits, but completely deprives the employee of his own activity.
Much has been said about the shortcomings that this system carries,
but, nevertheless, this is the simplest system.
The simplest system from the point of view of the manager's control.
I can always control whether you came to work on time or late for two minutes.
Whether you left work on time or left ten minutes before the end of work.
It does not matter that you are sitting for two or three hours after work.
It is important that you are late or that you are late for a break.
I will pay attention to this,
because if an organization wants to achieve certain results,
it should function like a clock.
If it does not suit you, look for another organization.
We will all find you a replacement.
Of course, there are also advantages in such a system.
It clearly states what to do and how to do it.
If something does not work,
it indicates that you do not meet the existing norms.
The management will not refuse the norms.
I will refuse the employee and find someone who will meet the requirements
that I consider optimal in these conditions.
Theory X.
Perhaps this theory is relatively successful in conditions of social instability,
in conditions of radical social transformations,
when it is necessary to save business,
when it is necessary to limit the possibility of penetration of alien elements into it,
when there is a rigid system of state regulation or other forceful influence.
In order to avoid these or those troubles,
it is necessary to meet these or those formal requirements.
This is the situation that we often face in Russia
and the situation that we will talk about later,
when we will talk about Russian specifics.
As for Theory X,
perhaps at the initial stage of business formation,
this approach has recommended itself.
Again, I draw your attention to the fact that we are now considering the management methods
that did not exist at all.
We are not engaged in theory now.
You can read about theory in books and the literature that is offered to you.
It is described in detail.
We are considering what really works.
Direct administration is really necessary within reasonable limits.
After all, this is not just our whim.
These are the requirements that we must meet,
because we must get certain results according to the concluded contracts,
according to what the suppliers expect from us.
Direct administration is a system that provides predictability
much better than two other systems that we will discuss now.
It is clear what will be done, when it will be done,
and what level of quality.
This is written in standards, regulations, and quality systems.
The next concept of management is the management of the system.
The next concept of management is either direct management or motivational management.
This is the Y-theory, which is aimed at building the system of motivation in the company.
According to the Y-theory, this management consists of
giving the opportunity to disclose the needs of the employees
and direct these needs and individual motives
to the direction of the work motivation
in which the company is interested as the owner of a particular business.
As for this theory,
in this case, it is not about direct orders and orders of influence on a person,
but about indirect influence.
Indirect influence, for example, is in the same system of labor payment,
which we talked about.
There is a fixed part that you will get, and there is a variable part.
What concerns this variable part, it depends on you.
Naturally, any person wants to get more money,
and therefore he will be motivated to increase the volume of sales,
to increase the number of clients.
I do not force you to do this according to the regulation,
that every week you have to find three new clients.
You found four, it's your business, but you found two, you can't cope.
In this case, it is indirect influence, indirect motivation,
which directs the motivation schemes of employees,
which contributes to improving their motivation,
which modifies their needs
in the right motivational direction, which the company is interested in.
The main idea, from the point of view of the management of the organization,
in the Y-theory, is to use the resources and abilities of each employee.
Look, in the previous X-theory, everything was very simple.
I am not interested in your capabilities.
I will fire you and find the person who will comply with the rules.
In the Y-theory, the situation is different.
Each person is individual, and each person gets something good,
but somewhere he has difficulties.
But you can't divide a person into parts.
You can be a good seller, but a useless manager.
When we use the Y-theory in management,
we try to use the motivations of each employee,
develop them, and then form the working groups
so that the shortcomings of some employees are compensated for by others.
Interdependence, interdependence, collectivism, affiliation,
group unity.
We work together on common goals, common tasks,
and achieving these goals and tasks is our common task.
Everyone contributes to achieving this goal.
At the same time, serious attention is paid to training and improving the qualifications of employees.
In this situation, we are talking about training and development of staff,
about their evaluation and motivation.
This is something that is practically absent from the point of view of the X-theory.
Why should I, as a manager and administrator,
spend money on your training and development,
when I'd rather make the staff department find me such an employee,
such a candidate, who will already satisfy the strict requirements that are prescribed?
The situation in the Y-theory is different.
Of course, I am interested in the competence of my employee
and I would like to make sure that the requirements that are prescribed to him are met.
But in the Y-theory, I also develop this competence,
invest in the employees' resources,
and this is also what motivates me to work in the company.
All that we talked about earlier,
when we considered material and non-material stimulation.
So, we have considered two theories, the X-theory and the Y-theory.
These are traditional theories of management of an organization
depending on the motivation that I want to organize as a manager of my company.
And these are the theories that existed in business communication for a long time.
However, the end of the last century was characterized by the fact
that the role and significance of the manager began to take the first place.
In fact, the X-theory and Y-theory are executive theories.
In them, we considered how to organize the executive functions of employees,
how they would work better in terms of performing their functional duties,
what competencies they need to perform the tasks that are set before them,
how these tasks can be changed when given any freedom of action,
when it is limited.
But who solves these issues?
Who, in the end, chooses what style of management,
and, therefore, what style of motivation will be in the company?
The manager.
Moreover, not necessarily the manager of the entire company.
The direct manager, the direct senior manager,
the head of the department, under whose subordination the manager is,
he determines the style, the degree of motivation that the manager will have.
Attention to the manager gradually took the first place,
and the result of the analysis of this situation was the creation of the third theory of management of the organization,
the so-called Z-theory.
But, again, we will consider this theory from the point of view of its role, place,
and structure of the motivation behavior that exists in the organization.
The Z-theory is based on the fact that, indeed,
in order to create in the organization the appropriate labor motivation,
the appropriate goals that the organization has,
the tasks that the organization solves,
it is necessary to pay attention to the managerial function.
Any organization has a functional executive,
the staff that works to solve specific tasks,
and the managerial function,
the organization of the methods of performing tasks,
the organization of the structure of management of the staff,
the organization of the structure of interaction,
the organization with various external institutions, other companies.
And this managerial function really becomes the key,
because it is from the manager that depends to a large extent
what style of motivation, what type of motivation will be implemented,
and what results we will get in the end.
As for the manager, the managerial function usually includes four main components.
As described in any textbook on management,
the manager must plan the organization's functioning,
plan business projects, business processes.
The manager must organize the selection of staff,
organize the compiling of the organization's staff,
which must solve the planned tasks.
The manager must directly carry out the management process,
with the hired employees,
organize, arrange the interaction between different departments of the company.
Modern companies have long been at the level of 1, 2, 10, 15, 20 people.
Modern companies are still a company of 100 people,
and when there are 100 people, there is no direct target system.
But the manager will not run around and tell each of the 100 people what to do,
and will not even remember who said what and who did what.
Naturally, it is necessary to optimize the management structure,
and this optimization is up to the manager.
What style of management will he choose?
What subordination will he build?
Direct administration, motivation, theory X, theory Y.
The choice of the manager, the choice of management,
is at the same time a choice of motivation, as we have just discussed.
And, of course, the fourth function that is in front of the manager,
and which the managers usually like to perform, forgetting the first three, is control.
You have planned, you have organized, you are in charge,
but you need to control how your company functions,
how the tasks that are set are solved and performed.
This is what is called feedback.
Not only do you need to know the criteria of the work,
but you also need to see how the process is implemented and be able to correct it.
Not in the case when the plan is not fulfilled,
the Tax Administration has started to withdraw documents,
when the accounting department has not submitted the necessary reports,
not when the matter is already in the process of being solved.
But control is when we see that in this direction,
sales, services, insurance, the administrative part,
suddenly start to fail, which will eventually lead to a general fiasco of the organization.
You need to control not the final disaster,
but the degree of organization and the degree of execution of the work,
the degree of execution of those plans that were planned.
So, the Z-theory is oriented to build these functions of the manager
from the point of view of the optimal management,
but we will be interested in it from the point of view of how the labor motivation system is built.
For this is the topic that interests us today, which we are dealing with today.
So, the Z-theory is based on the fact that the management and execution functions are closely interconnected.
And as for the management, it is the manager, the manager,
who determines the place and role of each employee in the team
and determines the methods and styles of solving the tasks that are put before them.
It is the manager who decides what responsibility to delegate,
it is the manager who decides what powers to delegate,
it is the manager who decides what method of motivation should be present in the organization.
What should be the material motivation with a fixed variable part,
what bonuses should be, what should be the non-material motivation.
Depending on the success of the implementation of the construction of the functional management function,
the execution processes will be built.
That is, in fact, the execution of tasks, functions that are put before the organization,
the achievement of those economic indicators, profit, competitiveness, stability, and the document of turnover that exist in the organization.
This is the Z-theory.
And if XY is, in fact, a choice of one style of motivation,
then the Z-theory is actually a theory that is a concept of switching different styles of motivation.
Because it is the manager who should decide what motivation to use in solving a task.
Within the framework of his company, he uses what motivation is optimal for achieving a particular result.
The same result in terms of sales plan can be achieved in a year in a democratic way,
and it can be achieved in a week in an authoritarian way.
And here it is necessary to determine with analysis, to conduct an analysis of which result is more effective,
and to determine with optimality.
This, of course, no one will do except the manager, simply because this is the function of the manager.
So, we have now considered the theory of organization management from the point of view of the formation of styles, methods, directions of motivation that exist for managers.
It depends on the concepts of Maslow, Herzberg, McClelland, which we have considered, or those that are based on them.
What we have just discussed concerns the general approaches of motivation,
those models that exist in it, those successes, failures, methods, options that exist.
What is the role of motivation in the organization of the company?
Well, as we noted at the very beginning, one thing is different approaches that justify themselves.
Everything we have discussed today, simply because we have organized the material,
are undisputed concepts, and our conversation is not an academic reflection.
We are looking at the results that have proved to be useful, to be competent for business.
But we have said that the application of all these concepts, justified, proven, sustainable, justified,
in a necessary sense, should include the specifics of the national economy.
In this regard, let's turn to our domestic reality and say a few words about how the motivation system of labor in Russia is built.
You are now listening to the concept of motivation that we are discussing.
You have read different books in which this motivation ecosystem is used.
Each of you, of course, has repeatedly tried to implement in your company
the different methods, models, schemes of motivation that exist.
You liked something, you didn't like something, you wanted to modify something, to change something.
Each of you has experience in building a motivation system.
And I would like to draw your attention to how these motivation systems are built.
Of course, we didn't invent them. We read them somewhere, we took them somewhere.
There is no time to conduct research in business.
We take an already working model and implement it in our company, hoping that it will work.
Russia is a country of specific nature.
Again, considering the social transformations that are taking place,
the economic radical changes that are taking place, they are no more than 15-16 years old.
And this short period of time poses a great danger.
First, of course, during these 15 years, a significant attempt was made to quickly,
concentratedly implement the best Western achievements in Russian management.
But the situation is getting more complicated because the implementation requires professional managers
who can quickly react to changes in business requests, business tasks,
and modify the implemented system depending on this feedback.
On the other hand, the mentality of the domestic staff is quite significantly different from the mentality of the Western staff.
Simply because if the Western business mentality has been around for more than 100 years,
then as a result of the 80-year Soviet period, business skills were lost.
The business skills were significantly lost, most of the population.
And in this regard, it is necessary to take into account the difficulties that arise from motivation.
It so happened that a significant part of the current active generation was brought up in the Soviet economic environment,
where there was a so-called confidence in the future, in quotes,
that if you are hired, you will sit until retirement, and when you retire, you will get your 120 rubles,
which is enough for you.
Now the situation is different.
Now, if you are hired, it does not mean that you will work there.
As for pension, we discussed it when we discussed non-material stimulation.
The pension that is paid today is not what you can live on,
not to mention the purchase of medicines, which in old age affect us all.
What features should be taken into account in the construction of a motivation system in Russia?
As for these features, statistical studies, analytical analyses were carried out,
which were aimed at identifying Russian specifics from the point of view of motivation.
In the end, people in Russia had the same needs, the same motives that their foreign colleagues have.
But the ways of realizing these motives, the ways of formulating and presenting these needs are, of course, specific.
In this regard, it should be noted that several significant points can be highlighted,
which should be taken into account when we build a motivation system,
either in a Russian company, or in a company where domestic staff works,
where our compatriots work, where we work.
The first feature that should be taken into account is,
as it is not surprising, the need to recognize that every worker is valuable to the organization.
The fact is that if we hire someone,
we invest some money in training, in time,
the employee is imbued with certain corporate ideas.
The point is not that he learned something,
that he can now go to a competitor and tell about our achievements.
The point is that the employee is invested, the time, the money.
Therefore, the employee is important and significant for the organization.
In Russia, this understanding of a person as a screw in the system has been preserved to this day,
which can always be painlessly replaced.
It can really be replaced all the time, but painlessly.
In this regard, when, for example, staff members close certain vacancies,
they often have to leave not so much out of the need to close the nearest term of the vacancy
on the formal grounds that a person is entitled to,
education, family situation, time to get to work.
The fact is that the personal qualities of a person are also necessary to take into account,
and to consider it as an investment.
We will now invest effort, spend our time on the development of this candidate for the vacancy.
We will do our best to teach him and to fulfill those tasks that will be in front of him,
according to the functional capabilities.
And, accordingly, it is necessary to give the opportunity to a person to show his abilities,
to show his initiative.
It is not worth to put a person in a very tight vice.
It seems that in the context of everything we have discussed, it is obvious.
But, again, it is obvious for the Western mentality.
As for the Russian tradition, Russian specifics,
here is this obvious fact, which, again, many people know,
and everyone agrees with it, but in reality this fact has to be put aside,
and it is necessary to pay attention to it.
The next point, which is related to the problem of motivation in Russia,
is that it is worth paying attention to the process of development of the staff.
Again, if we take an employee, we do not take him to close the vacancy,
and report that the vacancy is closed after two weeks after the application for its closure.
We take a person who is valuable to the company, as we have just said,
and, accordingly, we want this person to work in the company,
to develop with the company, to be present in the company.
Therefore, we must implement the development program and build his prospects for the person,
and implement the program of rotation of the staff.
If a person comes to work and knows that he has become an accountant,
and he will sit in this workplace until retirement,
there is no rotation and no motivation for work.
If a person comes to work and sees the prospects that he can achieve,
the career growth that can be provided to him,
depending on his success, on the manifestation of his initiative,
on his training, on his motivation, on the assessment that will be given to him in any assessment center,
then, accordingly, he will see the goal that he will strive for.
This goal, if he comes to work, can be satisfied,
and then he will build his professional development system in this company.
In this regard, when we talk about the problem of staff rotation,
there is a problem of staff assessment.
This problem is actually new for Russian companies,
and there are different methods of this assessment.
If we talk about the assessment of staff, about assessment centers,
then this is a topic of separate conversation, which, of course, will take a lot of time.
But if we say it in a few words,
the most popular is the system of staff assessment,
as a system of 360 degrees, or a circular assessment of staff.
In Russian literature, it has many names,
but the essence of this assessment system is very simple.
Usually, who evaluates the employee?
The supervisor.
He decides whether his duties correspond to the person or not.
Does he perform his function?
He does not.
What is the level of his competence?
This assessment system came to us from the Soviet period,
when the supervisor decided what and how he could include in the growth perspective,
or not include.
The situation has changed,
and today we assume that a person is in the organization,
a person is among the people of the organization,
and therefore only the supervisor is not enough to assess his competence.
Any person is passionate, any person is subjective.
And, accordingly, if I do not have a relationship with the supervisor,
it is difficult for me to claim that he will promote me.
In order to…
People are always subjective.
The system of 360 degrees, the circular assessment,
is aimed at trying to level from different points of view,
this subjectivity.
Here is something like an expert assessment,
when a person is naturally assessed by the supervisor.
That is, a person takes some position,
and this person has a superior supervisor,
who assesses how well this person copes with his or her duties.
But, in addition, there are other aspects of the specialist assessment.
First of all, this person can have his or her subordinates.
For example, this is a senior manager,
in whose subordinates there are two or three other managers.
This can be a department manager,
this can be a department manager,
who has a certain number of subordinates.
And when it comes to assessing this employee,
there is a need to ask the opinion of these subordinates.
How do they work under the supervision of this person,
this professional?
What system of motivation does he use?
What needs does he consider?
What does he focus on?
What climate of relations between employees does he create?
And how pleasant it is for them,
what authority does this person have over his subordinates?
That is, in addition to assessing the superior supervisor,
the subordinates are also important.
Of course, this is a tricky point,
because it is difficult,
but it is rare to have a situation
when we are satisfied with our supervisor on all issues.
And again, the supervisor always requires something.
The implementation of plans, the solution of tasks.
He imposes fines.
This supervisor checks the plans as you have done.
That is, there is a certain formal relationship
that we monitor.
Do you remember the functions of the supervisor?
Therefore, to assess the superior supervisor,
we add the assessment of the subordinates.
But here, of course, there will be subjective,
because we do not like to obey.
And, accordingly, we will always find the shortcomings
that the supervisor has.
What is fundamentally important, new and interesting
in the concept of 360 degrees,
is that a lot of attention is paid to the assessment
of the supervisor of employees of the same level,
that is, of the horizontal level.
We have now considered the vertical level.
That is, the superior supervisor is the subordinate.
But in modern organizations,
there are many departments that are on the same level.
You can be the head of a department.
And you have several departments
where there are also supervisors
who do not depend on you.
There is no direct direct subordination,
who perform the same functions.
They have their own subordinates.
They obey the same boss.
And they assess how convenient, functional,
professional it is for them to work with you
in terms of solving general tasks.
This is the horizontal assessment.
Here is the circle that turns out.
The supervisor is the subordinate of the employee.
And the staff is of the same level.
It seems that if you are on the same level,
there is no direct cross-section.
And, accordingly, this is another way,
another opportunity to avoid subjectivity.
What is the meaning of the 360-degree assessment?
This is the principle that I have just described.
It is the ability to limit,
to remove subjective approaches,
subjective assessments, subjective possibilities.
This is another titanic opportunity
to introduce objectivity into subjectivity.
I do not want to say that this system
works unambiguously.
But as practice shows,
with the presence of certain experience,
with the presence of organization stability,
with the presence of an adequate style of leadership,
an internal psychological style,
and internal comfort,
this circular expert assessment
is fruitful in terms of
the formation of a staff reserve,
in terms of building career trajectories,
in terms of forming a normal working-class climate
in the collective,
in terms of optimal, productive,
working motivation that arises.
We all work in one organization,
and the success of our activities depends on each of us.
When such a circular assessment takes place,
an attempt is made to take all possible contributions into account.
In principle, of course,
this is another approach to assessment.
But perhaps, of all that exists today,
it is the most popular.
This approach is such that
every person, every employee,
is assessed from all sides.
And it is assessed from professional and personal qualities.
And, accordingly, today they assess you,
tomorrow you assess them.
Therefore, when you know about it,
it is pointless to draw conclusions here, and so on.
This is the second way,
the second problem
that is related to the specifics of the motivation system in Russia.
The next point worth discussing
is the point related to the working schedule.
It so happened that traditionally
we have a working schedule
from 8 to 8 o'clock in the morning, plus an hour for lunch.
Someone from 8 to 5, someone from 9 to 6,
someone from 10 to 7.
But still, often these working schedules
do not take into account the requirements of the employee.
If you come to the organization,
you are made aware of the following.
Here we have a performance discipline,
here we have a work schedule,
let it be obeyed.
At the same time, let's recall the Y-theory,
which we discussed together with you,
the Z-theory.
The employee is qualified,
but he has a long way to go to work.
After all, all people are different,
someone is a dog, someone is a toad.
And, accordingly, he can come to work at 8 o'clock,
but after that he will come to himself at 3 o'clock,
and only from 10 to 11 he will start functioning.
So why in such a situation
is it so ineffective to use the employee
if there is an opportunity to shift the schedule
for an hour, for two,
but here it turns out that the organization is located to you.
Please, we are coming to meet you,
but you too, please, go to meet,
and perform your work activities with initiative.
It seems to be an unprincipled thing,
to shift the schedule for an hour or two for one person.
He will work later,
and usually an hour or two does not solve anything fundamentally.
But the very fact that
the attention is paid to the needs,
to the comfortable conditions for a person
is an important factor in the work of an employee.
The same can be said about incomplete work week,
about the ability to work either at work or at home.
Now, practically, the Internet is developed everywhere,
and the work of many employees
is not about communicating directly,
but about making reports,
getting data.
This data can be obtained at work,
but all this data can be obtained electronically.
It is no wonder that now,
in most large domestic companies,
the system of electronic document circulation has long been used.
Moreover,
many companies today have a widespread branch network,
and this branch network operates on the basis of the Internet.
In order to collect the necessary data,
to form an analysis,
if this is your functional duty,
it is not necessary to sit at work.
If you can do it at home,
or in another place where you feel comfortable,
in order to present a full,
competent report,
a competent analysis,
why is it worth prohibiting?
It is done simply because people have to sit at work.
In fact, in this case,
we are talking about the X theory,
Y theory, and Z theory.
We address the abilities, competencies,
professionalism of an employee,
and show him that we are interested in him,
and also interested in the comfort of his work and functioning.
The next point of the motivation system in the Russian soil
is related to the fact that
to provide workers with a discount,
for example, on the products produced in the companies where they work.
We cannot avoid the aspiration of our Russian man to freebies.
If there is an opportunity to sell products at a cost,
or even lower,
after all, not so many employees work in the company,
and, accordingly, they do not violate the financial indicators of production,
if they sell this product,
the return can be much greater.
Again, everything we talked about
when we talked about material and non-material stimulation.
The employee sees that the company
not only squeezes juices out of him,
but also provides something in return.
We need to start from the knowledge of the mentality of our compatriot,
because we are always used to get something out of something,
to get some benefit.
Let's satisfy this need.
And this motivation scheme,
this motivation line from the point of view of labor activity,
it justifies itself.
And, of course, gradually,
large Russian companies and medium-sized ones,
in recent years, as the company's economic development has grown,
this has also affected medium-sized companies,
began to provide various discounts,
partial or full payments of labor, vacation,
cultural programs, corporate events,
payment of the machine's material,
mobile communication,
everything that is called a social package,
everything we discussed.
At the same time, this social package
very often is a significant addition
to the amount of material stimulation
that the employee receives.
And, of course, when a competent person,
in whom the company is interested, comes to work,
this social package is often the stimulus
that keeps the person in the company,
and, accordingly, allows him to get the satisfaction of his needs
in this company, and not in the competitors'.
These are the main points
on the implementation of the civilized motivation system
of labor in Russian companies,
which exist today,
and which can be welcomed in one way or another.
We have discussed the motivation system,
we have discussed the concept of motivation.
Let's now see what opinions you have,
how much you think what you have heard
may be useful to you.
For this, you will be offered now several cases,
several situations,
which will present a problem.
Let's discuss how you, from your point of view,
based on your experience,
could propose ways to solve these situations
from the point of view of forming optimal motivational processes.
So, we have considered and analyzed
the most significant concepts of motivation
that are currently used in business.
We have considered them from the point of view
of motivation of employees,
from the point of view of motivation of the manager.
But still, let's, in conclusion,
return to the question of how the motivation
of one person is formed.
And we will consider this question not from the point of view
of different theoretical approaches,
but from the point of view of an experiment.
The problem of formation of human motivation,
the problem of formation of motivation of the staff,
the problem of formation of motivation of the professional
is a very important topic and has been studied by many researchers.
Well, as I see it, the most significant contribution
from the point of view of practical use
to study the problem of professional motivation
and its formation was made by Albert Bandura,
a representative of the cognitive-behavioral field,
who has done a lot for analysis of motivation
and behavior modeling,
whose activity he continues to actively work on,
he is an American researcher,
whose activity is trying to answer
real life requests, real business requests,
how to achieve the greatest efficiency from the point of view
of his professionalism, including.
Having conducted a large number of studies,
Bandura himself, his students, his colleagues,
and besides, as a result of analysis and generalization
of the relevant studies conducted for a long time in the world,
Bandura was able to bring together
and build a principled graph of the formation of motivation of a professional,
how it is carried out and how the professional growth is realized,
what contributes to it, what hinders it,
what dangers and obstacles exist here.
This is a very important question, because we have discussed
that motivation is naturally related to demotivation,
some factors can motivate an employee,
and the same factors for another employee
can be a demotivating factor.
Why is that?
How to distinguish this individual suitability,
individual significance of the same motivational factors
for employees working in the same organization,
being under the leadership of the same person.
As for Bandura, he came from the fact that
if a person has a clear labor motivation,
and this labor motivation is aimed at achieving the goals
that are ahead of him,
as an employee of a particular organization,
as a specialist, as a professional solving business tasks
that are before the organization,
then he tried to study how the level of professional competence
closely related to professional motivation grows
depending on the working time,
depending on the time periods,
depending on the fundamental events that occur at this stage.
Bandura comes from the fact that,
let's say, we hire a person.
His experiments were put in a slightly different key,
but now, since we are not analyzing Bandura's experiments,
but applying his results to business communication,
to business processes,
we consider these experiments from this point of view.
So, we hire an employee.
When we hire him,
it indicates that his initial level of competence,
initial level of professional development
meets at least the minimum requirements
that are presented to this vacancy.
The next stage, which, as we know,
is to train and develop this employee,
so that from a beginner he becomes a competent specialist
who copes and solves the tasks that are presented to him.
Therefore, it is necessary to train the employee.
To train him with a new skill,
a method of solving tasks adopted in the company,
a method that comes from the tasks that need to be solved.
Usually, when a person is hired,
he experiences an emotional uplift and he is motivated,
we talked about this,
to grow and develop,
because he wants to prove that the company did not hire him for nothing,
he can be useful to the company,
and even as a company he can be useful to the company.
And in the process of this development,
a person naturally forms expectations for himself,
that is, the level of competence,
the level of professionalism that he wants to achieve
in the near future in order to,
first, successfully implement the functional duties
that are in front of him.
Secondly, to recommend himself from the best side.
Remember the need for acceptance,
the need for achievement,
what we talked about at McLellan,
but of course, there is also a need for power.
Why do I achieve higher competence?
I want to have control,
control over my actions,
control over the tasks that I am solved,
and I must be able to solve the tasks that are put in front of me.
The tasks should not confuse me.
Therefore, I am interested in raising my competence level.
In this regard, let's turn to the graph that you see on the slide.
The first level that you see is the initial level of competence that the employee has.
We know that once the employee is hired,
this level of competence corresponds to the tasks that are in front of him.
But since the employee wants to develop,
since the employee is interested in professional growth,
at least in order to get a higher salary,
not to mention all the material motivation that we have just discussed,
the employee sets himself the task of achieving a higher level of competence.
The second level is the punctuation curve.
Again, this graph is a clear image of the results of Bandura.
In this regard, let's just assume that the first level of punctuation
is the initial level of competence that the employee has.
And the second level of punctuation
is the level of compulsion that he has set himself,
which he wants to achieve.
Naturally, on this graph we can clearly see this delta.
The difference between the level of competence,
the lower one is what the employee already has,
and the level of compulsion.
If I have this delta, I want to achieve this delta.
Naturally, I want to achieve it as soon as possible.
Therefore, in the process of training,
in the process of observing the already successful managers,
Bandura built a theory of training through modeling.
I choose the model, the results of the activity that I like,
and I try to model, to copy its behavior,
because I believe that by copying this behavior,
I will be able to achieve the same results, but even more.
This is the system of development of Bandura.
So, a person begins to adopt successful models.
This is the first section of the graph, the first sector.
He begins to adopt successful models,
and, naturally, he is on an emotional rise.
He is motivated, very motivated to achieve the result as soon as possible.
His competence begins to grow.
He begins to succeed in achieving the results that are ahead of him.
A person has an emotional rise.
He succeeds, and he himself evaluates this as a successful result.
He receives a positive feedback from the employees, from the manager,
that yes, you are succeeding.
But here comes the first critical point, or the point of the beginning of regression.
Look, the situation, again, is related to any human behavior.
I have a habit of behavior.
I no longer think about what and how to do it, I do it.
None of us thinks about how to write, we just write.
However, if suddenly the task is to write beautifully,
then we begin to take out letters, and, naturally, the speed of writing decreases.
At first we suffer, but we take out letters,
because we want our text to be written in beautiful letters,
but then we probably get tired of it.
We spend too much time writing these beautiful letters,
why do I need it?
I used to be able to write, that's how I write quickly.
Therefore, a person gradually asks himself questions.
He has expectations.
I will quickly learn to write beautifully.
I will quickly learn to get the results I need to meet the sales plan.
However, the speed at which I want it does not work.
My expectations of the speed of getting the result begin to differ from reality.
And so I think, something is not working out.
I'd better go back to my old, usual competencies,
because then I don't have to worry,
I will automatically get the same results.
Here is the first point of regression, which you see on the graph.
This is the first test that the employee faces
in terms of building a motivation scheme.
And here his activity decreases,
and the results he begins to achieve become less,
lower than the level of initial competence he had.
The so-called barrier to surpassation occurs.
If a person is disappointed in the criteria of motivation,
which are presented to him, in the company,
if a person is disappointed in his own abilities and strength,
what does he do?
He gives up the further acquisition of a new skill
and returns to the usual behavior.
Here it is, the return to the initial competence.
This barrier to surpassation is that I have accepted,
and I will not succeed,
but in the end, until the end of the trial period,
usually three months in the company,
I will reach the company,
I will get a salary for three months,
so why should I worry,
I will return to what I already had
and I will safely receive this salary.
Thus, the barrier to surpassation led to a loss of self-confidence.
A person refuses to acquire and build new ways of behavior,
a person refuses to achieve the desired work motivation
and returns to the initial competence.
It is enough for me what I already had,
and in three months I will find another place to go to work.
Thus, the barrier to surpassation broke a person.
Well, it broke not in the personal sense, but in the professional one.
We are now talking about work motivation,
about the professional growth of a person.
This is a negative option, as you understand.
However, if a person, an employee, meets support,
meets approval, meets understanding,
if, accordingly, he understands that everything will not work out right away,
everyone went through these difficulties and everyone decided that
yes, you need to make an effort,
yes, you need to spend more time,
yes, you need to stay after work,
yes, you need to limit yourself in entertainment,
but if this barrier to surpassation, thanks to support, is overcome,
then a person's competence gradually increases.
His skills, automatic skills, begin to increase.
You see, in this case, the overcoming of the barrier,
in this case, the implementation of the overcoming of the barrier,
the continuous curve, it begins to rise up,
and a person's competence begins to grow steadily.
You see, it goes to the level of the boss's competence.
A person, an employee, begins to be covered by his success.
He succeeds, that's the most important thing,
I'm not worse than others, which means I can be better.
And a person's growth begins, his expectations begin to be satisfied.
I set myself a task and I gradually, quite quickly,
look, we are still at the first stage.
This is a situation that is realized in the first week, two months,
in the first time when I just start acquiring new skills for my work.
I am on the rise, I have received support,
my competence is growing, and moreover,
it grows so fast that it exceeds even my expectations.
Look, again, the same first part of the graph,
the punctuated curve is the expected competence curve.
I assume that it will grow so smoothly,
and it suddenly began to grow even faster, almost exponentially.
And at the point that is shown on the graph,
where it is written, knowledge transfer to the professional context,
I exceeded my expectations and reached the level of expected competence.
I quickly reached the level of my expectations,
and this gives me a huge advantage.
I am on the rise, I am even more motivated,
I exceeded my expectations.
And here comes the second big danger.
If I managed to realize my expectations so quickly and so successfully,
they begin to grow rapidly.
Look, the third horizontal punctuated curve.
At first I set myself the level of expectations,
here is the second punctuated curve.
Now my expectations have jumped even higher.
I set myself the level of expectations,
and, of course, my delta increases even more,
which I want to reach between the level of my initial achievements
and the level of the expectations that I have reached.
And here comes the second danger.
My expectations have increased again.
And as for my achievements, they began to grow slower,
simply because I am mastering a new sphere of activity.
And since I am mastering a new sphere of activity,
it requires more effort, more attention, more concentration.
And so my competencies are higher than expected,
and I set myself an even higher goal.
Achievements of a higher goal are delayed and complicated.
And here comes the second point of regression.
I begin to think again,
why I am not getting what I want.
Does it mean that I am worse than others?
Is this my ceiling?
Why can't I achieve more results?
Why does everyone succeed, but I don't?
Well, yes, they work more, but so what?
Every person always considers himself more capable than others.
And here comes the second point of regression.
I begin to think again,
is this my goal?
Do I need this?
Maybe, well, I have achieved a certain level of achievements,
maybe I should stop at this?
Here comes the second point of regression,
when my expectations again diverge from my real achievements.
And here comes the second barrier of overcoming.
My motivation is falling.
I see that I am investing.
But if a day, two, three weeks ago I saw a real return,
now I am putting even more effort,
and the result is the same.
I am slowly starting to lower my hands again.
And this is the second barrier of overcoming.
Look, the second part of the graph is the part of euphoria.
I exceeded my expectations and I achieved a greater result.
And now comes the third part,
when my expectations are unjustified or too fast.
They have increased,
and my achievements do not meet my expectations.
And then my motivation and my activity fall again.
And this is the situation that occurs very often after training,
after training of the staff.
It seems that people are successful,
they have completed training,
they have gained new knowledge.
They would only now be able to better implement sales plans.
And after a successful training,
the indicators fall.
And, accordingly, the question arises,
why did I spend money on training?
I am a manager.
This is the barrier that is often associated with the fact
that the training results that I expected do not meet.
My competence falls.
It naturally remains much higher than the initial level of competence.
But now I am approaching the second barrier of overcoming.
And now I am starting to look for new alternative options.
I am starting to look for new ways
not to increase my competence,
but at least to keep it at the level that I have already reached.
Look, because of the discrepancy in the expectation of competence,
my competence fell a little lower.
The barrier of overcoming is higher than the initial level of competence,
but lower than what I had.
I want to cling to this level.
I am starting to be afraid.
What if I will fall down to my original competence?
What if I am so useless and incapable?
And then I have two options again.
Either I put my hands down here
and try to find alternative ways of behaviour,
a new job,
stop taking the initiative,
find new ways that will allow me to keep my competence,
even if it has fallen a little,
or I am able to overcome this barrier.
Again, just to understand with the help of other people's support,
with the help of competent leadership,
that in fact it is normal.
I have overestimated my expectations about my first results.
But it's all good.
I will achieve what I want.
I will achieve my level of competence.
But I just need to put more effort and spend more time.
If a person understands this and receives support,
then the fourth stage is coming.
I will not look for alternative ways to maintain my slippery competence.
I will put more effort to maintain my competence
and it will reach the desired level quickly.
This is what the fourth stage ends with.
When my level of competence is still higher than the one I had before.
Compare these two points.
This is the stage when I automatically use a new skill.
When the motivation I have reaches the desired level.
This is the stage when you can't stop.
So, the fifth stage is coming.
Here is the number 5 that you see on the graph.
This stage is characterized by the fact that you have reached the level of expected competence.
And this competence has become automatic for you.
As automatic as it was for you at the initial level.
Only now you automatically have the skill of performing certain or other professional actions.
Motivation formation is at a completely new level.
You have reached your level of competence.
Moreover, you have even surpassed it.
Now, just like before, you can transfer the successful actions you have,
the skill you have acquired, to a new sphere of activity.
And it often turns out that in new spheres of activity,
the skill you have developed leads to new achievements.
In the sense that it turns out to be useful there as well.
You have developed the skill of management so well,
that you can now manage not only two or three managers who work with you,
but you can also manage a department, your own company.
You can start your own business.
You have acquired the skill of time management.
You have acquired the skill of management.
And now you transfer this skill to a new sphere.
This is where the point of leap-forward development comes in.
It is called the starting point of the synergetic effect.
This is where the fifth stage ends.
When you are able to apply a successful model of activity,
a successful model of motivation, to a new sphere.
You set yourself new goals.
And now, without thinking about it,
you reach the most successful expectation
that you had at the end of the first stage.
This is where the point of knowledge transfer to a professional context is.
You have raised your expectations there.
And here the second point of regression with the barrier of overcoming arose.
Now you automatically, without your special thinking,
without your special efforts,
you have reached this level of competence.
This is how a person's motivation is formed.
But when you reach a new level of competence,
the sixth stage, which you see,
everything starts from the beginning.
Only now, with your initial competence,
with your initial level of development,
you will reach the expectation.
But then you set yourself new goals.
And so, in a circle, we set ourselves new and new goals,
new and new tasks, and we achieve them.
We can stop at the level reached,
but then it will be our choice.
This will mean that we are satisfied with the level of achievement we have reached.
Or we are afraid to lose what has already been achieved.
Therefore, it is better, as they say, not to twitch.
If a person stops here,
he remains a successful leader,
who first rests on the achievements,
and then either gives way to another,
or he has to develop further.
If a person does not stop at this level of motivation,
he sets himself new expectations,
and again implements the same schedule,
with all the same points of regression,
with all the same barriers of overcoming once again.
But now this schedule will be implemented faster and easier.
Just because you already have your own experience of overcoming points of regression,
you already know the mechanism,
you already know that you are able to do it.
And the schedule is compressed over time.
You need less and less time to move from the first stage to the sixth,
to move from the initial level of competition to a higher one,
the one you set for yourself.
This is a very important curve,
a very important result that Bandura achieved.
This is the fundamental result that is required today,
based on all the concepts of motivation,
which are developed by different specialists.
Based on all the concepts of building,
training and developing the staff from the point of view of its subsequent motivation.
Because it reflects the psychological features of human professionalism,
and the features of building our individuality with subjective motivation,
which is present in a person.
This is how a person is arranged.
Understanding, knowledge and constant vision of this schedule in your head
often allows you to avoid disappointments,
premature mistakes,
premature attempts to stop one or another activity.
The individual motivation of a person
So, now we have seen how an individual motivation of a person develops,
depending on the tasks that are in front of him.
Let's sum up what we have discussed today.
We have discussed the whole complex of issues related to the motivation of a person,
applicable to the management of the staff.
We have discussed the fundamental theory of motivation,
the theory of Gersberg, the theory of MacLeland.
We have analyzed the methods of material and non-material stimulation.
We have paid attention to the specific features of motivation
that arise from the point of view of the implementation of the management system
that exists within the company.
Then we have focused on the specific aspects of the implementation of professional motivation
that arises in Russia.
And in conclusion, we have analyzed the individual motivation growth curve
with all barriers, overcoming and methods of their implementation
that were discovered, justified by Bandura and his followers.
The results that we have obtained can be considered for a visual representation
using the schemes that you see now.
This is a scheme of the labor behavior model,
which clearly represents the structure of the information
that we have discussed when we talked about labor motivation.
In this case, we see the motives, the needs, the result of labor,
as well as the connections that exist and arise between them,
and which should be constantly kept in mind.
This model reflects the behavior of a living person.
This model gives a way of seeing and understanding
at what stage of behavior and motivation a person is,
and where and what difficulties he has.
The same applies to the next scheme,
which reflects the four stages of development and functioning of labor motivation.
As for these stages, they all intersect, they are all interconnected,
and again, these same stages, as we have already said,
starting with the concept of oil, do not allow for jumping.
We have needs that arise first.
We classify these needs depending on the tasks,
on the importance that we have.
Then we try to satisfy these needs,
the second stage,
we make either successful or unsuccessful options,
and choose those options of professional behavior,
those options of motivation that meet our needs,
the satisfaction of those motives that are in front of us.
As a result, we reach the fourth stage of motivation,
when we reach the level of professionalism,
the level of competence in terms of satisfying the initial needs,
and the next development begins.
We have completed the scheme of labor motivation at a certain stage,
we need to develop further,
we need professional personnel growth.
This scheme again begins to repeat itself,
only at a new level.
These are the main issues concerning labor motivation,
models, schemes, difficulties, tasks,
problems that arise in it,
and the main ways that have proven their effectiveness
in terms of the possibility of solving the most complex problems
arising in such a complex sphere as labor motivation.
Thank you for your attention.